---
title: 'The British International School, Cairo'
tagline: 'I helped connect a unique school with busy parents with a fast-loading, responsive website'
hero_image: /assets/work/bisc/bisc-hero.png
cover: /assets/work/bisc/bisc-cover.png
meta:
  -
    type: meta_data
    title: Client
    value: 'The British International School, Cairo'
  -
    type: meta_data
    title: Year
    value: '2013'
asset_sets:
  -
    type: set
    name: throth
    assets:
      - /assets/work/bisc/throth.svg
    caption: 'Redrawing the Throth emblem in SVG allowed us change colour elements on-the-fly. Illustration by the brilliant [Aegir](//aegir.org).'
    width: aside
    brickwall: false
    stage: false
  -
    type: set
    name: style-tiles
    assets:
      - /assets/work/bisc/bisc-style-tiles.png
    caption: 'An early set of style tiles I developed that helped get buy-in from the client.'
    width: x-wide
    style:
      - dropshadow
      - shadow
    brickwall: false
    stage: false
  -
    type: set
    name: mobile
    assets:
      - /assets/work/bisc/bisc-mobile-top.png
      - /assets/work/bisc/bisc-mobile-bottom.png
    caption: 'When the page first loads, tapping *main menu* simply jumps the user to the footer menu.'
    width: x-wide
    style:
      - shadow
      - frame-phone
    brickwall: false
    stage: true
header_colour: '#3E6DAF'
header_triangle_colour: '#0E2865'
header_text_colour: white
id: 9284e0ab-5abd-4ed7-9120-6d4f9384647e
tags:
  - web-design
  - web-development
  - creative-direction
---
I was excited to lead the design and development of a new website for the British International School in Cairo. This fabulous institution is a celebration of multiculturalism; their British sensibility juxtaposed with Egyptian hospitality.

This is the story of how our small team designed and built a fast-loading, responsive website powered by Firefly.

## Breathing new life into an ancient deity

{{ partial:figure set="throth" }}

Sometimes it’s the case with busy schools that they don’t have much in terms of brand visuals and assets. We found it particularly challenging to work with the current version of their emblem depicting the ancient Egyptian god, Throth.

Of course, with a school as fantastic as BISC we wanted to help them out. We created an updated, modern version of Throth as a responsive SVG that gave us the flexibility on the web. We also provided a new, simplified set of standardised brand guidelines that the school could use beyond the web.

## Developing a look-and-feel

Using an approach called [style tiles](http://styletil.es/) I worked through several different versions of the look-and-feel for the new site. This technique allowed me to work-up ideas quickly and get agreement from the client more easily than mocking up full pages.

With any design, I find that it’s relativity easy to create something good; taking about 20% of the overall work. The hard part is getting from good to great. This is where style tiles really come into their own: getting to the great much quicker. 

{{ partial:figure set="style-tiles" }}

## For parents on the go

Testing told us that around a thrid of visitors were accessing BISC’s existing site on their phones. With a further fifth using tablet-like devices it was clear **we had to deliver a great experience for all visitors, no matter what device they used.**

We also knew that mobile networks in Egypt were sometimes unrealiable, so we needed to build a site that would work even when connection speeds were low. With a **budget of 300 kb per page**; each page would have to be useable before any enhancements were loaded. 

{{ partial:figure set="mobile" }}

## Outcomes