---
title: 'Firefly''s pattern library'
tagline: 'I masterminded a highly complex pattern library built in Sketch that revolutionised the way my team created designs.'
hero: 'How do you ensure you’re producing consistent user interface designs across **hundreds of screens with thousands of components**? I led a project to create a pattern library in Sketch that reduced reparative work for my team and made it easy to provide precise specifications to developers.'
asset_sets:
  -
    type: set
    name: structure
    assets:
      - /assets/work/firefly-pattern-library/symbols-dropdown.png
    brickwall: false
    stage: false
    width: default
    stacked: false
    overall_style: default
  -
    type: set
    name: zeplin
    assets:
      - /assets/work/firefly-pattern-library/zeplin.png
    brickwall: false
    stage: false
    width: aside
    style:
      - shadow
      - frame-browser
    stacked: false
    overall_style: default
key-color: '#F3AA3F'
second-color: white
third-color: '#E06E2C'
meta:
  -
    type: meta_data
    title: Client
    value: '[Firefly Learning](//fireflylearning.com)'
  -
    type: meta_data
    title: Year
    value: '2017'
header_colour: '#0066C0'
header_triangle_colour: '#164B7A'
header_text_colour: white
id: 4bceb7af-c037-4221-847a-d36713a36294
---
## Hundreds of components, thousands of permutations

Our vast library contains over 350 separate interface elements across 4 themes, each with their own set of multi-variant overrides; meaning there are 1000s of possible items that can be used in any design.

Given Sketch's flexibility, without a naming system in place, we very quickly ran into problems; getting lost in a nest of symbols. 

To solve this, I created our `constructions`, `parts` and `patterns` structure that allows for easy discoverability and usability of components. 

{{ partial:figure set="structure" }}

## Supercharging creativity

We recognised early on that using our pattern library carried an inherent risk. Just like Lego, we now had a kit of standard parts. We feared that this would lead to formulaic designs that used predefined UI rather than interfaces that were truly usable and delightful.

We built the fix into our design process by totally ignoring the pattern library.

We introduced a two-phase process of UI ideation and UI artwork. In the first phase, designers are free to solve the problem in whatever way they think best, without having to worry about producing pixel perfect designs. In the second phase, we translate our designs to use existing components or propose changes and additions to the library.

The result is that we now have a tool that supports creativity, consistency and speed but gets out of the way until we need it.

> Jon was vital in driving this project, ensuring that the design team were given enough time to devote to building the pattern library and championing it as a necessary resource to the broader development team.

Aegir Hallumander, UI Designer at Firefly.

## Better conversations with our developer friends

{{ partial:figure set="zeplin" }} 

For all its power, our pattern library alone doesn't offer any benefits for developers. Alongside the pattern library, we developed a style guide.

Our style guide documents each component in all possible states.  We share the style guide via Zeplin, which allows developers to inspect each element to understand its makeup. And because we share predefined colour variables across design and development, they can call these directly in SASS.