---
title: 'Design at Firefly'
tagline: 'For 7 years I helped students, teachers and parents all over the world as Firefly''s Head of Design.'
hero_image: /assets/work/firefly/hero.png
cover: /assets/work/firefly/firefly-cover.png
meta:
  -
    type: meta_data
    title: Client
    value: '[Firefly Learning](//fireflylearning.com)'
header_colour: '#'
header_triangle_colour: '#'
header_text_colour: black
id: 89be8aca-4378-4978-b747-dcd2e395e600
---
For 7 years I played a key role in establishing Firefly’s reputation for design excellence; both as a hands-on designer and leader of the design and front-end teams.

I'm enormously proud of everything my team and I achieved at Firefly. I worked with some immensely talented people on products that helped thousands of teachers, students and parents to teach, learn and share knowledge.

## Dozens of school websites

In the early days, we offered bespoke services alongside our product. I was responsible for creating marketing websites for some of our key schools. 

(something else here)

## Going Native

In 2011, I designed the first generation of our native apps Teacher Planner and Student Planner. These apps brought Firefly's functionality to the iPad and iPhone. 

They allowed teachers to set and mark homework from anywhere—even without an internet connection. Students could now submit homework in ways that worked for them like using the iPhone's camera to submit a photo of their work. At the time, this was pretty revolutionary stuff. 

In 2012, Student Planner was nominated for a BETT innovation award. 

## Letting each school's personality shine through

Schools use Firefly everyday, so it’s no wonder they want to inject a little of their own personality. We had to find a way to allow customisation without creating a situation where we couldn't update Firefly for fear of breaking custom sites.

We added two layers of customisation: For Schools on our standard package, my team created four themes designed to fit the personality of the widest cross-section of our clients.

For those schools who wanted more we offered theme branding. It took several iterations to get this right but eventually we landed on a system that allowed schools just the right amount of control without being overwhelming. Schools provided 2 colours and a logo and Firefly's smart recolour technology would do the rest.

I was responsible for designing one of the four themes (the other three being designed by my team) and much of the coding across all four themes. For more on this, have a look at Rachel Anderson's work creating our primary theme, Storybook.

## A consistent user experience on the web

In late 2015 it became painfully clear that something was wrong with Firefly's interface. Years of building new features on top of old had left the UI fragmented. I led a project to review each of Firefly's interface components and establish a new front-end pattern library.

Time was a factor in getting this right — we wanted to give our users the best experience but needed to also ship new features. My team and I worked with a consultant over a two week period to quickly catalogue and iterate over the design of a unified UI.

Danielle, our lead front-end developer hand-built a pattern framework in Node.js to allow the rest of the team to quickly add-to and use interface components.

### Patterns for everyone

With our new front-end pattern library in place I turned my attention to using patterns in our design process. I led a project to create a fully-featured Sketch design system.

## A Markbook for the 21st Century 

Teachers have multiple ways to store marks from homework and task they've set for their students; in spreadsheets, databases or written on paper. Firefly already did a pretty great job at allowing teachers to set and mark homework, but we didn't really offer anyway to view or make meaning from marks across multiple assignments.

In 2015, my team and I designed a solution: The Firefly Markbook automatically collates all marks from homework and tasks set through Firefly. Teachers can also add tasks completed outside of Firefly meaning all marks are stored centrally.

A particularly gnarly problem we had to overcome was how to visually represent performance at a glance. In early designs we used shades of red for bad marks and green for good. In testing this made sense but  "good" and "bad" were never the same for each teacher or even between different tasks. 

Our solution was to use shades of blue like a heat-map to reveal relative performance. Using this scale, teachers can very quickly see which of their students are performing consistently and who needs some extra help.